Syllabus for CSC 4103 Sec. 1 (Operating Systems) Fall 2016
==========================================================

**Introduction**. Welcome to Operating Systems! In this course, you will learn
about topics in OS theory and application. See the calendar for details.
.. raw::
           Name        Castleberry, Dennis
           Office      2019 Louisiana Digital Media Center
           Hours       M: 10:00-4:00, T/Th 2:00-4:00, by appt.
           E-mail      dcastl2@tigers.lsu.edu
           Phone       (225) 578-5912
       
           Tests       (3 x 128 points)  ...  384 points
           Homeworks   (6 x  64 points)  ...  384 points
           Final       (1 x 256 points)  ...  256 points
           Total                         ... 1024 points

**Textbook**.  The textbook is *Operating Systems Concepts* by Silverschatz,
Galvin, and Gagne.  If you can find the 8th edition for much cheaper than 
the 9th, then go with it.  I will be relying on the textbook since this is
my first time teaching the course.

**Availability**.  Please make an appointment with me to be sure I’ll be in the
office. I answer e-mail during the weekdays, but not weekends. Note that your
homework is due on 6:00 PM on Sundays, so you’ll need to plan ahead if you want
help with it. My most frequent visitors tend to be good students!

**Homework**.  Homework is completed on the steam.csc.lsu.edu server and
submitted via the p_copy program. You may be given a choice of problems; you
may answer up to 128 points worth (no more). You may earn up to +2*N points of
extra credit for turning in the assignment N<=8 days in advance of the due date
(but no more than credit earned for the assignment). Your last submission is
the ony one that counts for the purposes of determining credit.

**Attendance**.  I do not directly measure attendance, but I do give extra
credit worksheets. These may be follow-along sheets, class activities, group
activities, or pre-tests. These worksheets also serve as study guides for the
test. Copies are not made. I may have rules on how worksheets are done (I may,
for example, ask you to do them in non-erasable colored pencil).  You must
reclaim the worksheet the next class day to guarantee receiving it back.

**Lateness**.  For quizzes and tests which you miss, you must supply a
university-approved excuse in writing to make them up. Unexcused late work
receives a zero. If homework is one second late, it receives a zero. There are
no exceptions to this, even if the lateness is due to a technical difficulty. 

**Cheating**.  Don’t do it! If you e-mail me about trouble you have with
homework, I will help you. I want you to succeed while playing by the rules. If
there is evidence to believe a student is cheating (e.g. plagiarising codes for
homework, employing tricks during a test), the incident will be processed.  If
you are receiving help from another student, be sure to credit that student
where appropriate.

**Words to the wise**.  I'll be honest--this is my first time teaching this
class, and OS is my weak point.  I can't hold a candle to Dr. Feng Chen, but I
will do my best to give you the coverage you need.  Nevertheless, I will hold
you to the same high standards I hold myself in pursuit of excellence.

Assume that there will be no curves; all points are earned, and every point
counts.  Assume that if your final grade is one point away from a higher grade
category, it will stay.  You are allowed seven days to contest a grade earned
(from the date it was entered).  Maintain a positive attitude, embrace
challenges, and make good decisions (turn in homework ahead of time, study
ahead of time, practice regularly, and overestimate the difficulty).
